Schools are getting rid of homework from Essex, Mass., to Los Angeles,
Calif. Although the no-homework trend may sound alarming, especially to
parents dreaming of their child’s acceptance to Harvard, Stanford or Yale,
there is mounting evidence that eliminating homework in grade school may
actually have great benefits, especially with regard to educational equity.

In fact, while the push to eliminate homework may come as a surprise to many
adults, the debate is not new. Parents and educators have been talking about
this subject for the last century, so that the educational pendulum continues
to swing back and forth between the need for homework and the need to eliminate homework.

The Problem with Homework: It Highlights Inequalities

One of the most pressing talking points around homework is how it
disproportionately affects students from less affluent families.
The American Psychological Association (APA) explained:

“Kids from wealthier homes are more likely to have resources
such as computers, internet connections, dedicated areas to do
schoolwork and parents who tend to be more educated and more available
to help them with tricky assignments. Kids from disadvantaged homes are
more likely to work at afterschool jobs, or to be home without supervision
in the evenings while their parents work multiple jobs.”

While students growing up in more affluent areas are likely playing sports,
participating in other recreational activities after school, or receiving
additional tutoring, children in disadvantaged areas are more likely headed
to work after school, taking care of siblings while their parents work or
dealing with an unstable home life. Adding homework into the mix is one more
thing to deal with — and if the student is struggling, the task of completing
homework can be too much to consider at the end of an already long school day.

While all students may groan at the mention of homework, it may be more than
just a nuisance for poor and disadvantaged children, instead becoming another
burden to carry and contend with.

Beyond the logistical issues, homework can negatively impact physical health
and stress — and once again this may be a more significant problem among economically
disadvantaged youth who typically already have a higher stress level than peers from
more financially stable families.

Yet, today, it is not just the disadvantaged who suffer from the stressors that
homework inflicts. A 2014 CNN article, “Is Homework Making Your Child Sick?”, covered
the issue of extreme pressure placed on children of the affluent. The article looked at
the results of a study surveying more than 4,300 students from 10 high-performing public
and private high schools in upper-middle-class California communities.

“Their findings were troubling: Research showed that excessive homework is associated
with high stress levels, physical health problems and lack of balance in children’s lives;
56% of the students in the study cited homework as a primary stressor in their lives,” according
to the CNN story. “That children growing up in poverty are at-risk for a number of ailments is both
intuitive and well-supported by research. More difficult to believe is the growing consensus that
children on the other end of the spectrum, children raised in affluence, may also be at risk.”

When it comes to health and stress it is clear that excessive homework, for children at both ends
of the spectrum, can be damaging. Which begs the question, how much homework is too much?

How Much Homework Is Too Much Homework?

The National Education Association and the National Parent Teacher Association recommend that
students spend 10 minutes per grade level per night on homework. That means that first graders 
hould spend 10 minutes on homework, second graders 20 minutes and so on. But a study published 
by The American Journal of Family Therapy found that students are getting much more than that.

While 10 minutes per day doesn’t sound like much, that quickly adds up to an hour per night
by sixth grade. The National Center for Education Statistics found that high school students get
an average of 6.8 hours of homework per week, a figure that is much too high according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). It is also to be noted that this figure does not take into consideration the needs of underprivileged student populations.

In a study conducted by the OECD it was found that “after around four hours of homework per week,
the additional time invested in homework has a negligible impact on performance.” That means that
by asking our children to put in an hour or more per day of dedicated homework time, we are not only
not helping them, but — according to the aforementioned studies — we are hurting them, both
physically and emotionally.

What’s more is that homework is, as the name implies, to be completed at home, after a full day of
learning that is typically six to seven hours long with breaks and lunch included. However, a study
by the APA on how people develop expertise found that elite musicians, scientists and athletes do
their most productive work for about only four hours per day. Similarly, companies like Tower Paddle
Boards are experimenting with a five-hour workday, under the assumption that people are not able to
be truly productive for much longer than that. CEO Stephan Aarstol told CNBC that he believes most
Americans only get about two to three hours of work done in an eight-hour day.
When Does Homework Actually Help?

In the scope of world history, homework is a fairly new construct in the U.S. Students of all ages
have been receiving work to complete at home for centuries, but it was educational reformer Horace
Mann who first brought the concept to America from Prussia. 

Since then, homework’s popularity has ebbed and flowed in the court of public opinion. In the 1930s,
it was considered child labor (as, ironically, it compromised children’s ability to do chores at home).
Then, in the 1950s, implementing mandatory homework was hailed as a way to ensure America’s youth were
always one step ahead of Soviet children during the Cold War. Homework was formally mandated as a tool
for boosting educational quality in 1986 by the U.S. Department of Education, and has remained in common practice ever since.  

School work assigned and completed outside of school hours is not without its benefits. Numerous studies
have shown that regular homework has a hand in improving student performance and connecting students
to their learning. When reviewing these studies, take them with a grain of salt; there are strong arguments
for both sides, and only you will know which solution is best for your students or school. 